>> The Western lifestyle is
built on a fight or flight mode.
Everything is go, go, go.
This response disconnects
people from themselves.
>> It's about raising
people's awareness,
opening up their consciousness,
opening up their horizons.
>> My work day starts at 5:30
in the morning when I wake up.
And usually, I'm going
a million miles an hour
until I fall into bed.
>> I'm a type II diabetic,
diagnosed about a year ago.
>> I lost my mother
two years ago.
>> I got up in the morning one
day and was kind of just going,
oh god, I really need some help.
>> I was shaking and
struggling to breathe.
>> Been to the doctors, and he
gave me a percentage of have
a heart attack.
And his answer was 18%,
but it should be 1%.
>> I went in for a very standard
eye surgery that went horribly
wrong.
>> I've been having cameras down
and off to the doctors and off
to hospitals.
>> The depression that
just comes, I again,
just close off and I
can't really function.
>> This place down in Thailand
says it can actually change
your head around, change
your inner space around.
>> I actually feel different.
It's so bizarre.
>> Heading for a retreat on an
island in the North China sea,
Nick Knowles joins a group who
are all seeking the antidote
for the strains of modern life.
How will the gang cope with a
completely new way of living?
>> I think that some of the
participants didn't really know
what they were getting into.
>> It's almost cultish.
>> I think it's going
to be a challenge.
>> Will 28 days of detox and
alternative therapies be enough
to change their lives?
>> This is one kick ass detox.
>> Welcome to Thailand.
>> Previously on The Retreat.
>> Just take a moment here to
breathe fully into the body
and stretch, stretch,
stretch the body,
extend the legs long as well.
Really go for it.
>> That was interesting.
My first ever yoga lesson.
That was-- well, it's
tougher than I thought.
>> It doesn't change
in one week, OK.
>> You don't think it's changed?
>> So it was at 170, and
then now he's at 101.
>> Wow.
70 drop.
>> Really?
Wow.
>> You kept all of this.
>> The detox is over.
Just had my last
soup, day seven.
Tomorrow, the schedule actually
says food, lunch, and dinner.
>> Woo-hoo!
>> With the fast at its end,
the retreat shifts gears,
changing focus from
food to mindfulness.
But how will the gang
take to new practices?
>> So nice now.
I don't know.
>> They're more--
>> Oh my god, bowls and utensils
with solid things in them.
>> Only five.
>> Yeah, not for me, thanks.
I'm not hungry this morning.
[LAUGHTER]
>> Happy birthday to us.
>> Girls, what's happening?
You're not eating.
>> No.
We think we're going to extend
the fasting bit with the juice
option, I think, eh?
>> And support Mills and--
>> More support for Milton.
>> Milton, I'm not
going to support you.
[LAUGHTER]
>> Since you're a fan,
I was counting on you.
And Billy.
>> Yeah.
>> Tell us what it tastes like.
>> Oh, look at you.
[LAUGHTER]
>> Don't say it
tastes disgusting.
>> Chew your food.
>> Nothing can be disgusting
after not eating for seven days.
>> Is this papaya?
>> You haven't eaten for a week.
What do you care?
>> She's being really picky.
>> Down your neck.
>> I'm going to go and pack.
>> With a tube in the butt.
There's no mess.
Unless you're a little loose.
>> Little loose for me.
>> That's so nice.
[LAUGHTER]
>> Congratulations.
>> Well--
>> Well done.
>> Thank goodness.
>> Do you actually-- so when you
said about the-- do you feel any
different from the detox?
>> Yeah.
>> In what way?
>> Lighter headed.
Lighter in body.
Almost and in-- body and spirit.
I know I almost said that.
Maybe I'm catching on to it.
I don't know, I just feel--
--fresher, really, than I
have done in a long time.
>> I don't really think I
feel a massive difference.
>> You look a lot different.
>> I don't feel it, really.
>> You looked like a sluggish
oaf when you arrived.
Now you're all sparkly eyed
and sprightly around the place.
>> Sluggish oaf?
>> Yeah.
Well, that's in the past.
We can forget about that
now that I've said it.
>> [LAUGHS] Yeah but
anybody that like--
because I've burned myself and
look a bit briary and a bit
reddy.
Anybody that's got a bit of a
tan looks better, don't they?
Generally.
>> That doesn't look good.
That's not a bit of a tan,
and that doesn't look good.
>> With everyone except
Milton now back on food,
or at least juice, the effect on
the gang of the island and its
healers is astonishing.
The hike over Bottle Ridge leads
to one of the island's more
isolated and beautiful beaches.
Worth an early start.
>> I don't like
being at the back.
I've seen it in the films.
They take the back
man out first.
>> Having reached the halfway
mark at the retreat and with
the fast becoming
a distant memory,
Nick and the boys welcomed
the early morning adventure.
>> Look at the sun
through the trees as well.
The timing.
>> You all right?
>> [STUTTERS]
Sweating profusely.
>> Hold that for me, will you?
>> Am I living?
>> No, you passed
away about halfway up.
>> My general fitness is
not what it used to be.
>> Well done, son.
>> It's like Jurassic Park.
All this tropical forest
where you could imagine,
like, dinosaurs moving
through the jungle here.
It's fabulous, isn't it?
Amazing.
[WAVES CRASHING]
>> Feel a bit like Leo DiCaprio.
Leo DiCapraudio.
Found the Beach, hasn't he?
He knows he's going for a swim.
>> So nice.
>> While the boys refresh
themselves with a swim,
it's the 11th early morning
walk for Milton and Cathy.
Despite still being
on his fast, Milton
is determined to keep
increasing their distance.
So Dominique has
a quick catch-up
to check he's not going too hard
for a man with type 2 diabetes.
>> I mean, you were
losing weight last week.
>> Yeah.
>> Eating.
>> But now on the fast--
>> Yeah.
>> --it goes fast.
But how do you feel inside?
I mean, now that
the end is coming.
>> The end is coming.
Yesterday felt a little rough.
>> Why?
>> Just felt just drained and--
>> Is it because I heard you're
going on hikes on the mountain.
>> Well, I didn't go on a hike.
But this morning we were
meant to do our normal walk.
What takes an hour.
We got lost, and
it took two hours.
>> How did you get lost?
There's one road.
>> Yeah, no, we
got lost somehow.
But, yeah, I still-- it's still
nice to get out in the morning,
because it sets
me up for the day.
>> You are aware of last
week of eating healthy.
>> Yeah.
>> Your blood sugar went down,
your cholesterol went down.
Everything went down, basically.
Almost like a normal person.
>> Yeah.
>> And so this week,
you were fasting.
Do you expect-- what
do you expect now?
>> Keep on the same
kind of program, really.
Because I still want
it to stay down.
It's not like, hallelujah,
let's get back up there again.
>> Exactly.
>> So no, no, I'm ready to keep
it on that level, because I--
it was nice to see
everyone so happy.
And, you know, as well as
me being happy about this--
you know, everything
coming down.
So that was a good feeling,
a really good feeling.
>> I'm just so fed up with my
eyes ripping every night since
I've been here.
I don't know why they're so bad.
And I'm wondering if
it's because there's not
much humidity here.
Anyways, just feeling
really fed up.
But I'm excited, because I'm
going to the osteopath in about
half an hour.
And I hear he's brilliant.
And I'm really hoping
he can pinpoint
why my body isn't healing
itself the way it should.
>> The gang are going to be
subjected to more invasive
physical therapies
for about a week.
First up is Oren, the
retreat's osteopath.
>> I deal with anatomy and
physiology and mechanics.
>> Already, Nick looks
less than impressed.
>> So what I'm going to do,
I'm going to check your body.
Because all of you
know that you have
pain in all kinds
of area of the body.
Lower back, neck, shoulder.
I'm very interested in
the source of your pain.
And through the knowledge
of anatomy and physiology,
I'm going to, like,
an exploration
to try to understand where
your pain is originating.
>> There has been a lot wrong
with me for a long time in terms
of physical well-being.
And so I use
physios quite a lot.
And I've always found
that sports physios
are the best, because they
just get everything working in.
But they don't-- they never
say they're going to cure me
of the problem, because it's an
ongoing problem that I have from
injuries.
Whereas here, more
interestingly,
he's saying he can
get on top of this
by actually finding
the root cause.
>> This is sensitive here?
>> Yeah.
>> Yes.
And here?
>> Not so much.
>> OK.
>> If I can walk
away from, you know,
this experience without actually
having to see a physio every
week because of the damage
that I've got done to me,
then that will be
absolutely fabulous.
When he was doing
manipulations or said
he was doing
manipulations, there
appeared to be no movement or
manipulation going on at all.
By the same token, it did
feel better after than before.
>> Stretch the lower leg.
It's painful?
>> No, no.
>> It's not painful.
>> I'm not sure to exemplify--
if I was to press you
on your shoulder blade now and
say, does that feel better?
Then you'd say yes.
I can't honestly
say whether he's
pressing me as hard the
second time in those
places the first time.
So the only way of knowing
whether that's actually worked
or not is over
the next few days,
in the next couple of days,
whether I feel better.
>> You feel it?
>> Yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
>> Yes.
>> Yeah.
>> Interesting.
He's unpredictable.
>> Exactly the middle here.
>> He doesn't respond in the
way that you would expect.
I still feel the tension and
the pain in the low back.
It's been a long-term
problem, and I'd
be very surprised if that
got solved in one session.
>> With Nick and Laura still
unsure of Oren's effectiveness,
April sees him with her
chronic eye condition.
>> The top of my eye is
no longer properly adhered
to the rest of the eye.
I have severe dry eye, and I
have recurrent corneal erosion.
What happens to me is when I go
to bed at night, within about
30 minutes, my eyeballs
are glued shut.
Sometimes both eyes,
sometimes one eye.
Is that when I open my eyes,
pieces of the epithelial layer
are pulled off.
And I'm in absolute agony
>> You see, because I
want to release your--
all the orbit area.
>> It was absolutely incredible,
because the response in my body
was so profound.
And I could feel, like,
energy moving through areas
that I think had been
blocked previously.
I feel much more in alignment.
I feel much more balanced
on my left and right sides.
Absolutely.
And it's going to be really
interesting to do yoga,
because my right hip is
always really, really jammed.
But he's just
loosened that all up.
I'm excited.
Well, time will tell, right?
>> With everyone hitting
their own rhythms,
the gang are on different paths.
>> I'm glad that I extended my
detox from the seven days to 13
with the juices.
I feel my body needed to
clear a lot more things out,
which apparently, this helps.
And it's not easy watching
everybody eat their food.
I mean, you just-- you're
craving to have something.
But I think you've got
your end date in mind
and you're doing it for you.
And everybody is doing their own
little journey on this thing.
And so you just--
as long as you know where you
going, it's tough, but it's OK.
>> Melody does this vegetarian
sushi that is pretty
spectacular.
So I didn't want to kind
of have a big blowout.
I just would have really liked
a plate of her vegetarian sushi.
It would have just hit the mark.
I want to chew something.
I want some flavor, and
I want some texture.
>> As Milton and Cathy's
walks get ever longer,
the morning finds them
trekking as far as Thong Sala,
the island's capital.
>> Overripe.
>> Yeah.
>> Not a great place for
two people on a fast.
But they're not
the only ones who
have slipped the monk-like
confines of the retreat.
Laura has taken
Claire into town.
And is keen to show her the more
spiritual side of Ko Pha-ngan.
>> I've been studying the dharma
as part of a group over the last
few years.
And it's a really
important part of my life.
I started to meditate.
And then I asked to be a mitra,
which is-- just means friend.
But it means you've committed
to the path of Buddhism.
And then a few years after
that, I requested ordination.
>> The dharmic monks here
take the retreat's meditation
practices to some
extreme levels.
This monk is practicing being
in a state of nothingness
and can sit like this
for hours on end.
It's quite emotional times
here, because you're here
to face your problems.
Some days, I don't really
want to talk about them.
I cried the other
day because I didn't
want to go to reiki, because
it was quite hard going.
And it takes a lot out of you
and just talking about it again.
But you have to give yourself
a pep talk and be like,
this is why I'm here, and
I've got to get over this.
And I've got to try
something different.
And it's everything's
there to help you
and to help me feel
better when I go home,
which I really need to do.
>> I want to talk to Maggie to
check what happened yesterday
with you.
>> Ever vigilant, Dominique
checks in with the gang over
a coconut to discuss another
new level of the program.
So I had that very
deep tummy massage.
>> Chi nei tsang?
>> Which was painful in places
and incredibly, incredibly deep.
I thought at one
stage, literally,
she was massaging
my kidney and liver.
She said that there was a
bit of a build-up of clay
and that there was
definitely a blockage.
Not the clay, but
there was a blockage.
She didn't necessarily manage
to get rid of the blockage,
but at least we sort of
moved things around a bit.
So I feel a lot--
a lot better.
>> Great.
>> Chi nei tsang is a deep
tissue abdomen massage designed
to specifically move toxic
blockages and release negative
emotions from individual organs.
Only some of the gang
opt to try it out,
as it can be extremely
uncomfortable.
(SINGING) But I
still have my car
Now we over
I've been stopped,
mixed up for years
And it's only my pride
that keeps me alive
Yes, it is
>> So that note
there, that's good.
No, that's good, that's good.
>> We'll get there.
We're getting this.
Getting this.
Getting there.
>> Yeah, we'll get that--
we'll get that on point.
>> How are you finding it?
Let's look at the shape of you.
>> Yeah, well, as I keep
saying, if I came on this--
on a mission, you
know what I mean?
And I was going to--
you know, I was going to
stick to what I was told
and do what I was-- you know,
do whatever, like the experts
and that was telling me to
do kind of thing, you know?
And been enjoying the yoga.
Just been kind of
enjoying it all, really.
>> What do you
make of the reiki?
>> Reiki didn't work for me.
>> No.
>> Didn't work for me.
Didn't do anything.
I felt a bit odd
through that experience,
but I didn't really come away
with a hallelujah moment.
>> Yeah, not me.
>> I saw it in some other guys.
>> I had a good kip
a couple of times.
>> I had a good kip.
[LAUGHTER]
I could hear myself snoring.
That's what woke me up
>> At 1:30, I've got
to go to the hub.
I've got a-- what do I have?
I've got a chi nei
tsang with Satyama.
And that's a tummy massage.
I mean, you've met Satyama.
She's one of our
yoga instructors.
And she seems to like pain, kind
of, or inflicting pain, which is
making me a little bit worried.
She seems to smile at it.
And I believe this
can be quite sore.
So I'm worried about
the pain infliction.
Also, you know, hopefully
I don't react and slap
her on camera by mistake.
>> So today, we will do a
session called chi nei tsang.
A very deep abdominal
massage that
is working towards the
support of your cleanse.
>> You say deep, getting
emotional and deep tissue.
I mean, is this going to be
quite emotional again or--
it could--
>> It can be.
>> Or--
>> You can be prepared for that.
For example, the liver
is associated with anger.
So a lot of times when I'm
touching on someone's liver
on the right side of
the body, it's like,
this will trigger something.
But also, like lungs, heart,
associated with grief,
for example.
Or kidneys associated
with jealousy.
So depending on what your
physiological makeup is
and what's going
on in your life,
then these things
can be activated,
or it could be
totally pleasurable.
Or you could totally
feel like you've
got so much energy at the
end, or you could totally
feel drained.
>> OK.
Ready to go.
>> While Cathy tries to
relax and get the most out
of the session, the others are
encouraged to let themselves go
with some deeper yoga.
>> Today's class, we're working
with opening up your hips.
And we're working with a muscle
today called the psoas muscle.
So this muscle attaches in T12.
There's no need--
>> The psoas is a particular
muscle used in the fight
or flight instinct.
And a tight one increases
feelings of stress and anxiety.
>> Inhaling, the right
leg goes behind the body.
Looking up, keeping
an arch in your back.
>> [LAUGHS]
>> Man down.
>> I'm not a big fan
of pushing myself.
I've never been a big fan of
pushing myself physically.
Hence, not being
particularly toned.
But the overall benefits of--
I feel like my
body is opening up.
The stiffness in my
back, neck, and shoulders
has virtually gone.
So I'm getting into the postures
and feeling like I can do them.
Really enjoying the breathing
and meditation side.
So yeah, it feels like we're
getting the full package.
>> That was kind of--
that was kind of cool.
Because actually
for the first time
today, I've heard it
said for eight days now,
lose the outline of your body.
When you like relaxing.
And I did.
Actually couldn't feel
where my skin was.
It's like I was twice the size
or I was, like, expanding.
But not feeling
where my skin was.
That was really weird, actually.
That was kind of odd.
I mean, you're aware where you
are, aren't you, at all times?
You know where your skin is.
You know where your
arms are and legs.
I mean, I still know
where they were.
It's just that--
>> Hope so.
>> The blur-- no, the outline,
I understood what they meant
for the first time today.
I like-- look, you know,
I'm the least hippie person
in the world.
But I actually-- seriously,
I feel kind of stupid
even saying it.
[LAUGHTER]
I really do.
I felt like a complete
Muppet saying it.
But actually-- actually, I did.
[LAUGHTER]
I don't care what
you think of it.
[LAUGHTER]
>> So the last couple of days,
I've actually been feeling like
I'm not doing that
well with yoga.
And I don't know if it's to
do with hunger and maybe in
and out of depression
and being happy,
if it's all just
part of the process.
I'm battling at it
a little bit now.
>> We close the left, we
exhale through the right.
Making sure your exhalation is
longer than your inhalation.
>> His constant coming back to
the breath and then lengthening
the breath when you're feeling
stressed has been brilliant.
Oh, that meditation at
the end is just beautiful.
>> I am finding the meditation
part at the end when
you're visualizing people,
I find that really hard.
I get really upset.
I've never really been
asked to wish people health
and happiness who you
don't like, you know,
and have caused you pain.
I just never realized that
yoga was that powerful.
>> Staying with your breath.
Your left side.
And then holding this.
Gently releasing the posture.
Keeping your eyes closed.
Coming into a comfortable
sitting position.
Into a comfortable
standing position.
Exhaling and relaxing.
>> Next time on The Retreat.
>> I'm about to go into
this igloo shaped thing.
[LAUGHS]
I'm a bit scared, because
they said they hum in there,
but you're not allowed to talk.
>> If I'm completely honest,
this place I'm not-- you know--
I'd sooner go to hell,
I think, than go here.
>> I would stay
away from the gym.
>> He's a chap that I don't
think one could really describe.
I mean, I asked if
he could levitate.
And he said yes, and he also
said he could walk on water.
>> What I came here
to do was get--
I don't think it's a
cliche, but, you know,
the mind, body, and
soul kind of balance.
>> I cried last night.
Woke up crying.
>> I just had this epiphany.
I kind of just felt
like I'd let you down.
>> I just had a very,
very strange experience.
[MUSIC PLAYING]